# ncaa_data
## Google Cloud & NCAA® ML Competition 2019-Women’s

This is a group project done by four other Data Science students and me to answer the following question: Using regular season and NCAA tournament data and external data, can we determine specific features that most influence a team’s performance throughout the season? Using these top features, can we predict the March Madness bracket with some baseline accuracy?

We hypothesize that certain features, such as key differences between home and away teams, region that the team is from, win percentage, distance traveled to play a game, and the amount of overtime and days of rest, have the most influence on a team’s performance throughout the season.

From Scenario 1, we looked at the performance of both home and away teams using data from the 2010-2017 seasons. We found that, for the regular season, the distribution of point differences between teams to be right skewed, which makes sense since most games would end up as close match ups. Specifically, we found that this histogram is unimodal, with a mode of around 5. Additionally, the distribution has a long right tail, making it right skewed. For the knockout rounds, we saw a similar distribution in that we got a unimodal histogram, with a mode of around 5. The distribution has a long right tail, making it right skewed. Next, we found that, for total points scored during the regular season and NCAA tournament, total points had normal distributions. Then, we used choropleth maps to determine that states like New Hampshire and Rhode Island have closer games, while games in Oklahoma and West Virginia are more one sided. Then, we found that, from our boxplots, there is no indication of whether attack or defense is more important during the regular season. For the NCAA tournament, however, we can see that home losing sides have significantly more points scored than away losing sides.

For Scenario 2, we performed feature engineering on a team’s seed to help develop a model to predict tournament success. To determine tournament performance, we looked at the round at which a team was defeated. Then, we found that the round of 64 is the most frequent tournament placing out of all 16 seeds. Next, we ran chi-square tests, which would express how different each observed counts were from average expected placements. From our analysis, no observed distribution of counts of each round the team is out is modeled after the uniform distribution of expected counts.

From Scenario 3, we looked at the differences in the “hard-work” metrics, such as fouls and rebounds, for teams admitted to the NCAA Tournament. Specifically, to detect a statistical difference amongst attributes, we conducted various t-tests in order to decide whether or not these statistics are the difference maker when it comes to whether or not a team makes the Final Four. One interesting insight while performing data analysis is that the University of Connecticut (UConn) has made every Final Four since 2008, making UConn a bit of a dynasty institution. Using bar plots, we determined that teams that make it further in the NCAA tournament tend to pick up a lower amount of fouls than those teams that exit earlier in the tournament. By using hypothesis testing, we find that there exists a statistically significant difference in the average number of fouls committed amongst the final four teams and the rest of the field. Again, using hypothesis testing, we find a statistically significant difference in the average number of steals per game amongst the final four teams and the rest of the field does not exist. Furthermore, we find that teams that are able to rebound at a higher rate, on average, are able to move deeper into the tournament and have a better chance of reaching the Final Four.

From Scenario 4, we wanted to determine if the distance traveled to play an NCAA tournament game had any effect on a team’s performance in the game, particularly if distance traveled has any effect on a team’s proportion of wins. Once we found the haversine distances of each winning and losing team to their respective game location, we plotted them and found that a majority of games and institutions are from the Midwest to East Coast regions. Initially, we found inconsistencies in a potential relationship between travel distance and proportion of wins. Next, we found that there is no linear relationship between these features. However, an interesting insight is that about 65% of winning teams in both the 2010 and 2017 seasons traveled less than the losing teams, suggesting that a shorter travel distance would favor a team to win over a longer travel distance.

From Scenario 5, we sought to create a feature that quantifies how “beat-up” a team is at the end of their season. For this scenario, we used metrics, such as overtime, days of rest, median fouls against, and median travel distance. To determine if the above variables are useful in predicting a team’s success, we used a Random Forest Classifier to find the proportion each of the above features contributed to predicting team success. One insight was that while there is much overlap in the beat-up scores among the different values of the Result variable, it appears that teams that didn’t make the NCAA tournament are more likely to have higher beat-up scores. Then, we conducted a permutation test to determine if there was a statistical significance in the beat-up means, and we found that there is such a significance.

From our additional analysis, we wanted to see if there is any relationship between the average cost of attendance per state and either total travel distance per state or each state’s proportion of wins. Similarly to travel distance, we found that there is no linear relationship between mean cost and proportion of wins. From there, we created a model to help us predict the outcome of the March Madness bracket using the features that we engineered throughout our scenarios. We built a model that could output an accuracy of about 80%.
